---
title: ''
date: '2012-03-12'
tags: []
published: false
---

With 2012 now in full swing, the four year cycle of two events begins anew.  These events, of course, are the Presidential election and the Summer Olympics.  While challengers in the former contest have traded the Olympian's good looks and chiseled physique for a well-coiffed head of hair and a closet of expensive ties, the differences between these two competitions go beyond the cosmetic.  Some of the most significant differences, perhaps, are the rules for deciding the victors. For example, it is easy to determine who is the fastest runner in a group of people; much harder is to determinate the "best" candidate for president, regardless of the voting system used to select a political winner.

Because of this, it is easy to scapegoat the political process when the results of an election run counter to one's desires - the right person didn't win, one may argue, because the system is broken.  The two party system, for example, is sometimes cited by critics as a cause of the current dysfunction in Washington.  But perhaps much of what ails the current political climate comes from an underlying mathematical dilemma in the way we determine the winner of an election.  The mathematics of voting can highlight many of the issues of voting systems, and also proposes some interesting solutions.

There are a number of directions this story could take.  Here are some examples:
<ul>
	<li>Is there a "best" voting system? (Short answer: yes! Somewhat longer answer: it depends on who you ask).  Why don't we use it?  What are the odds we could actually change the way we elect candidates to office?</li>
	<li>What other voting systems exist?  What are their comparative advantages/disadvantages?  This idea was covered fairly well in the 2008 book <span style="text-decoration: underline;">Gaming the Vote</span> by William Poundstone.  Note that most examples of voting systems fall under the umbrella of Arrow's Theorem, a mathematical result stating that, roughly speaking, any voting system into which voters feed an ordered list of their preferences is bound to have some defect, unless you have a two party system.  However, there are voting systems that fall outside the domain of this theorem (see the short answer to the previous question above).</li>
	<li>What are some examples of different voting systems in action? Examples:</li>
</ul>
<ol>
	<li>The Pirate Party, a political party in Germany, uses Range Voting, the "best" voting system mentioned above, and is one of the few examples in politics of this voting system in action (there are examples of this voting system in nature, however, or at Battle of the Bands competitions).</li>
	<li>The video game series "LittleBigPlanet" allows users to vote on the levels they play.  The first game in the series used Range Voting, but the second game in the series used an inferior voting system.  Why is this the case?  (Note that the goal here isn't quite the same, since one isn't trying to find the "best" level, but simply find a collection of great levels.  Nevertheless, the founders of the website hotornot.com moved from an inferior voting system to Range Voting, unlike the LittleBigPlanet games.)</li>
</ol>
The first topic here could be covered adequately in an essay of about 1,000 words minimum, though of course, could be expanded upon.  The second topic would need to be longer - the length would depend on the number of voting systems explored.  Each example in the third topic listed could be covered in 500-1000 words.  All of this could also be combined into one longer essay, or a series of shorter ones.

Ideally, I'd like to give some history of the mathematics of voting systems, including Arrow's Theorem and why it doesn't apply to every voting system.  Depending on the specific topics to be discussed afterwards, I could speak with William Poundstone, members of the Pirate Party, and/or folks at Media Molecule, developer of the LittleBigPlanet series.  I'm also a contributing member at the Center for Election Science (www.electology.org), so I have some connections to people who study the current state of voting systems.

A little bit more about me: I'm a PhD candidate in mathematics from UCLA, and am also the founder of Math Goes Pop! (www.mathgoespop.com), a blog that explores the (surprisingly rich) intersection between math and pop culture.  Among other things, I've written about <a href="http://www.mathgoespop.com/2010/08/the-futurama-theorem.html">Futurama</a>, <a href="http://www.mathgoespop.com/2010/09/scott-pilgrim-vs-gravity.html">Scott Pilgrim vs. the World</a>, and <a href="http://www.mathgoespop.com/2011/05/parks-and-recreational-mathematics.html">Parks and Recreation</a>.  I also have a paper coming out in a forthcoming collection of essays on math and pop culture (see <a href="http://www.mcfarlandpub.com/book-2.php?id=978-0-7864-4978-1">here</a>).  More info about me can be found on the Math Goes Pop w
<div>I've recently become a contributor to CNN's Light Years science and technology blog (<a href="http://lightyears.blogs.cnn.com/" target="_blank">http://lightyears.blogs.cnn.<wbr>com/</wbr></a>).  For my first essay I've been asked to write about voting (using the prolonged GOP primary season as a way to motivate the topic), and though I've only got 750-1000 words to play with, I'd like to discuss a couple of different voting systems and make a plug for score voting at the end.  I've been asked to briefly discuss several different voting systems and then use math to give endorsements - since the word limit isn't huge, I was thinking of discussing only IRV, approval, and score voting as alternatives to plurality voting, talk about some of the weird things that can happen under IRV, maybe mention arrow's impossibility theorem, and endorse score voting, making mention of its minimal bayesian regret property.</div>
<div>My question to you is whether or not you think there are any other salient points you would like to see squeezed into a broad essay like this, whether you think I should consider other voting systems, etc.  Basically I'm interested in whether or not you think this sounds like a reasonable outline for a general audience who may have no background in voting methods.</div>
<div>If you've got any thoughts I'd love to hear them.  I imagine I'll have to pick and choose what I write about, because I probably won't have space to discuss all the important points, but if I'm omitting something glaring, I'd rather discover that now than after the article goes live.</div>
<div>Happy Friday!</div>
&nbsp;
